Background
	The cooperatives in this study include: the Domes community, Sunwise co-op, J Street co-op and Cornucopia co-op. I will begin the background by first addressing what a housing cooperative is, followed by an examination of North American Students of Cooperation (NASCO) organization and Solar Community Housing Association (SCHA) non-profit, and lastly, I will be reviewing the various institutions at each of these four housing cooperatives. NASCO and SCHA are important because they facilitate and assist in institutional transfer and management of the co-ops. Co-op management relates to conflict because the availability of conflict mediation mechanisms is dependent on various sources that influence what institutions and choices can/will develop in each house. 
Cooperatives: Principles in the 21st Century, defines a housing cooperative as an autonomous association of persons united voluntarily to meet their common economic, social and cultural needs and aspirations through a jointly owned and democratically controlled enterprise (Zeuli and Cropp 2004). A housing cooperative is a shared equity model; equity builds in the corporation through (1) user ownership, (2) user-control, and (3) proportional distribution of benefits. Cooperatives practice: (1) voluntary and open membership, (2) democratic member control, (3) member economic participation, (4) autonomy and independence, (5) cooperation among cooperatives, and (6) concern for community (Zeuli and Cropp 2004). These principles have their roots with the Rochdale Principles, a set of ideals for the operation of cooperatives set out by the Rochdale Society of Equitable Pioneers, United Kingdom in 1844. This book is popularly referenced by North American Students of Cooperation (NASCO) member housing cooperatives. NASCO is a federation of housing cooperatives in Canada and the United States, started in 1968 (NASCO 2014). 
Traditionally, NASCO has been associated with student housing cooperatives, though non-student cooperatives are included in its network (NASCO 2014). NASCO provides its member cooperatives with operational assistance, encourages the development of new cooperatives and serves as an advocate for cooperatives to government, universities and communities (NASCO 2014). The NASCO model facilitates the organization of co-ops in Davis, California with topics concerning: meeting process, board roles and responsibilities, planning, staff relations, marketing, diversity awareness, conflict resolution, facilitation, consensus decision-making and organizational development for new cooperatives (NASCO 2014). NASCO like SCHA assist in providing new governing institutions to member cooperatives.  
SCHA is a Davis-based 501(c) (3) non-profit with the goal of providing environmentally conscious and affordable housing (SCHA 2014). Currently, SCHA owns and operates three cooperatives houses: Sunwise Co-op, J Street Co-op and Cornucopia Co-op; and also manages the Baggins End Collective Community (the Domes) at the University of California, Davis (UCD) (SCHA 2014). Residents of the houses and the Domes maintain their living space and serve on the organization’s board of directors (SCHA 2014). In the co-ops there is a hierarchical form of governance whereby houses create sets of rules within the bounds of the larger political institution, SCHA. Moreover, the rules that houses create are tailored to a long history of membership turnover; most of the bylaws under SCHA are the same since its inception in 1979, which cater towards sustainability and low-income housing. 
The Domes community opened in 1972. The Domes unlike any other co-op is very transient due to the nature of their student-leases, this creates a high turnover rate of residents. Residents at the Domes are a self-selected group of university students (i.e., undergraduate and graduate). In 2010, Student Housing decided that the Domes were unsafe to live in and stopped signing leases in spring 2011 (Domes Welcome Packet 2014). In response to this closure, old, current and future community members rallied to create a plan for re-opening the Domes and during this time, a group of community members negotiated a new lease with the university that moved the Domes management from Student Housing to SCHA (Domes Welcome Packet 2014). The Domes community adopted various institutional structures from SCHA houses and past cooperative community members. These institutional structures are meant to help in making the Domes a self-sufficient and autonomous cooperative at the end of the five-year lease with SCHA. The Domes is an interesting case, the population size is much greater than the other co-ops managed by SCHA; they currently have a population of twenty-six. The data available for this group is somewhat dysfunctional due to poor archival data. Therefore I am omitting the Domes in the analysis but I will discuss this bias in the ‘Results’ portion of the paper.  
	The first cohort to move into Sunwise co-op (est. 1978) also created SCHA to own and manage the property, to be directed by a board of the residents (SCHA 2014). The first cohort from previous student cooperatives carried over various governance institutions into Sunwise. What this does is helps in providing an already existing structure for new institutions; the cost to make a new institution is higher than transferring one from a previous co-op. The house has held a population size ranging from twelve to seven throughout its years of operation since 1979. 
It is believed the age of residents at Sunwise tended to be older comparatively to other properties. Although this belief has not been tracked quantitatively, qualitatively previous members regarded this house as the ‘graduate student’ house, due to its relative abundance of graduate students over the years (SCHA 2014). 
	In 1992, SCHA began to move and renovate several buildings to a lot in east Davis to create a “homestead” of houses (SCHA 2014). The properties were originally occupied in 1996 (SCHA 2014). By 2006, it became clear that Federal funding requirements, the needs of single-parents and other challenges made the Homestead co-op a social and financial liability to SCHA (SCHA 2014). The property was sold to the Community Housing Opportunities Corporation and Yolo Community Care Continuum to better serve the community (SCHA 2014). This ‘failed’ co-op can serve as an example of the transitional nature of cooperative communities, the complexities affecting these communities, and ways that cooperatives can become dysfunctional. 
On J Street, J Street co-op began operating in 1986. Across from this co-op in 2010 another co-op opened called Cornucopia co-op. This is an interesting case where one co-op has established itself within the community while the other co-op is beginning to develop community within and around the co-op. Institutions will vary, they rely on population dynamics, input from other institutions within and outside the community and time. Moreover, they’re much more complex that makes generality a bit more difficult than I can analyze. This is because there are other dynamics that influence institutions such as the historical background of each member and challenges from interpersonal and structural violence.
Institutions for collective-action vary from house to house. They operate and change with time as a variable; moreover, these institutions influence behavior (i.e., promoting or constraining). The institutions in this study include: (1) wealth creation, (2) chore systems, (3) administration, (4) monitoring and policing, (5) conflict management, and (6) community building. Wealth creation refers the structures regarding equity and resource distribution (i.e., monetary, food staples and produce). Chore systems refer to the distinctive patterns of routine tasks ranging from internal household chores to external SCHA chores. Administration refers to those coordinated structures regarding collective decision-making at group-level interactions (i.e., where consensus decisions would ideally be made). Monitoring and policing are instruments useful to curbing potential free-riders and maintaining house goals. Conflict management is a mechanism useful in navigating negative aspects of conflicts and increasing group benefice from positive aspects of conflict. Community building is practices toward unifying and creating group cohesion and an opportunity to create common ideals among individuals within the community. 
The following represents institutional diversity in each house, they vary accordingly with population dynamics. (1) Wealth creation – Domes: board payments (i.e., food and utilities), domes bank reserves (i.e., short-term and long-term maintenance cost) and SCHA bank reserves; Sunwise: board payments (i.e., food and utilities), house bank reserves and SCHA bank reserves (i.e., long-term maintenance cost); J Street: board payments (i.e., food and utilities), house bank reserves and SCHA bank reserves (i.e., long-term maintenance cost); and Cornucopia: board payments (i.e., food and utilities), maintenance funds (i.e., short term), house bank reserves (i.e., long-term maintenance cost) and cookie jar donation system. (2) Chore systems – Domes: monthly work parties, individual dome chores and cook nights; Sunwise: monthly work parties, bi-weekly garden parties and cook nights; J Street: nine-person chore wheel, twenty semi-permanent chores and cook nights; and Cornucopia: nine-person chore wheel, monthly work party, eleven semi-permanent chores, watering the garden and cook nights. (3) Administration – Domes: SCHA representatives, weekly meetings, decision by consensus (i.e., relative to the people present at the decision-meeting), student liaison with the University of California, Davis and house handbook; Sunwise: SCHA representatives, ‘tentative’ house meetings and decision by consensus; J Street: SCHA representatives, bi-weekly house meetings, decision by poll-taking and house handbook; and Cornucopia: SCHA representatives, bi-weekly house meetings, decisions by majority vote and house handbook. (4) Monitoring/policing – Domes: mandatory work parties and mandatory community meetings; Sunwise: action-tem list (i.e., ‘commitments’ to Sunwise); J Street: bi-weekly chore check-in; and Cornucopia: action-item list. (5) Conflict management – Domes: SCHA conflict mediator, domes conflict mediator and community conflict resolution model; Sunwise: SCHA conflict mediator and conflict resolution process sheet; J Street: SCHA conflict mediator and conflict resolution binder; and Cornucopia: SCHA conflict mediator. (6) Community building – Domes: house retreats and fall quarter community development meetings; Sunwise: house retreats, house dream list and dinner plans list; J Street: house retreats; and Cornucopia: house retreats. 
